---
title: Why Nuclear Energy?
description: Get to know the best reasons to adopt nuclear energy.
published: true
lastUpdate: 2025-03-02
image:
  src: https://cdn.worldofnuclear.com/static/images/art/flux-galaxy.webp
badge:
  label: Perspective
---

::InfoHighlight
This essay was written by a human. Can you tell? Do you like the style?
::

## Incremental Optimization

Energy is the key to thriving. As living beings, we have built-in systems for converting food into energy. We can optimize that conversion by adjusting our diet, breathing fresh air, and keeping our our muscles in shape. Still, the amount of work our bodies can do is limited.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/why-nuclear/thriving-family.jpg' :bg='light' caption='Thriving takes energy.' :width='400px'}

To do more, we need to be clever and leverage additional energy sources. For example, we might use a lens to focus sunlight (radiation energy) onto a dry leaf to start a fire (heat energy). We add some logs and use our campfire to boil water or roast some meat. Cooking our food kills germs, and our bodies extract more energy than if we had eaten the food raw.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/why-nuclear/campfire-boys.jpg' :bg='light' caption='Thriving is better than just getting by.' :width='400px'}

That is what we mean by thriving. Doing better than getting by.

Through incremental improvements, we have learned how to use machines to do more. For example, a water wheel uses potential energy that comes from gravity. Water flows down, pushing the wheel around, which turns a shaft that is connected to a grinding stone. The rotating stone grinds wheat into flour, which is a key ingredient in bread. Delicious.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/why-nuclear/waterwheel-powers-mill.jpg' :bg='light' caption='Incremental improvement in energy transformation.' :width='400px'}

Then we improved on the water wheel. We dammed rivers and introduced water turbines that generate electricity. Electricity is portable energy, given a bit of high-gauge wire. From gravity to electrons that power our toasters that make our bread even tastier.

In a relative blink on the galactic timeline, humans have devised many ways to convert natural energy to productive uses. Of course, we also found plenty of destructive uses. That said, this essay focuses on what we want more of, energy that helps humanity thrive.

## Practical Energy Sources

Some sources of energy are practical. That is, they are suitable for powering our machines, and we have experience using them.

### Burning Things (Combustion)

Fire is one of the most common sources of energy. A supply of oxygen and a spark are all it takes to set fuel ablaze, releasing energy in the form of heat and light.

The common byproducts of burning things are carbon dioxide (CO<sup>2</sup>) and water (H<sub>2</sub>O). The main drawback of burning things is air pollution: gases like carbon monoxide (CO) and sulfur dioxide (SO<sup>2</sup>), soot that is full of things that are bad for our lungs.

Of course, lots of things can burn. We have already mentioned wood. "Biomass," or things that once lived, is the more general category of fuel. Wood and other plant matter, animal carcasses, even algae. Same smokey output.

Fossil fuels are a rich source of energy, which is why they are so popular. A tank-full of gasoline gets you about 350 miles, give or take. A tank-full of oil will keep you warm through a cold winter. A 100-car train carries enough coal to power a city for an hour or two.

Fossil fuels are said to be "dirty" energy. However, that depends on the form. While coal and oil are loaded with pollutants, natural gas (methane) burns cleanly, producing only water and carbon dioxide.

Another clean burner is hydrogen. Just like methane, hydrogen and oxygen combine to release water vapor, CO<sup>2</sup>, heat and light. Liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen give rockets the massive thrust needed to go into orbit, with little if any pollution.

By the way, CO<sup>2</sup> is not a pollutant. It is a necessary part of our lifecycle. Plants are happy to turn CO<sup>2</sup> into food, like potatoes, and we are happy to turn potatoes into French fries.

On the other hand, most fuels do release toxins into the atmosphere and leave a pile of ash that is also full of toxins.

### Chemical Energy

The stuff of batteries.

### Harvesting Environmental Energy

We have many ways to gather energy from what is happening in our environment. Sunlight, wind, rivers, waves, and tides all carry energy. Cracks in the ground expose energy from the core of the earth.

We turn sunlight into electricity in a couple of ways. One is using mirrors to focus sunlight onto a boiler. Steam from the boiler turns a generator that pushes electrons onto the power grid. This takes a fair amount of land, and it works best where the sun shines most, like in a dessert.

The other is with solar panels. Photons from the sun move electrons in solar cells, which adds energy to the grid. The great advantage of solar cells are their portability. Among the disadvantages are the use of heavy metals and other pollutants in their production.

Also, relying on the sun limits the hours of production to when there is daylight, during the day, when the weather is clear.

Speaking of the weather, wind power comes from pressure gradiants in the atmosphere. That is, when high pressure is next to lower pressure, air flows, blowing back our hair and furling our flags.

Storms are a hallmark of this difference in pressure. More consistently, we see this effect near the coast, where air inland heats and rises during the day, drawing in cooler air from the ocean. Then the flow reverses at night as the land becomes cooler than the ocean.

If you put wind turbine in that path, you can generate a nice flow of electrons. However, the weather is fickle and unpredictable. So relying on wind power at any given moment is fraught with the risk. Say when things get hot everywhere, and the pressure gradiant goes to zero, the wind turbines stop turning. Just when you need it most, your air conditioner will not run.

Also, wind turbines have to be pointing in the right direction. Also, wind turbines break and stop turning. Or the blades fall off. Or the generators catch fire. Also, wind turbines kill birds. Wind turbines in the ocean disorient whales, who die and rot on the beach.

In a fantasy world of the imagination, wind is a free source of energy. In reality, harvesting wind comes with undeniable tradeoffs.

On a happier note, hydropower works quite well. As long as the rivers are flowing, we can turn falling water into electricity. People tend to live near rivers where the energy is needed.

Some will talk about the environmental impact of mixing concrete to form a dam, which can be said of any modern construction. In any event, water power is quite reliable and operates without polluting. Give it a gold star.

### Splitting Atoms (Fission)

About a century ago, scientists got busy figuring out how to harvest the power of nuclear energy. Why did they bother? Because nuclear energy is about a million times more powerful than the next best energy source.

When you release all of that energy at once, bad things happen. However, using a controlled release of nuclear energy, we can convert a small amount of material into productive energy over a long period of time.

We have been using nuclear energy to produce electricity for decades. As a power source, nuclear is reliable and steady. Using nuclear energy is not easy, requiring knowledge and discipline. The byproducts of nuclear fission (splitting atoms) are radioactive materials, which would be dangerous to leave lying around. So we try to keep everything in shielded containers.

Due to an overabundance of caution, using nuclear tends to be expensive. Some of this expense is justified. Some is due to guarding against imagined concerns with little to no practical evidence.

The lessons that follow are focused on the selling points of nuclear energy. The big wins that put it at the top. For now, mark it down as one of the practical sources of energy.

## Theoretical Energy Sources

Some sources of energy are theoretical. They are based on our ideas of how things work, but we have not yet figured out a reliable way to put these ideas to work. Even if the theories are credible (i.e., worthy of belief), these energy sources are not practical.

While there is nothing wrong with pursuing new and better ways of converting energy, they do not belong in a comparison of ready-to-use energy.

### Alternative Hydropower

Harvesting energy from waves and tides seems like a good idea. Wave energy converters are able to capture the kinetic and potential energy of ocean waves.

Geothermal energy is another less-than-practical source. (picture of geo-thermal plant) Perhaps we are better off saving our hot springs for theraputic baths.

### Combining Atoms (Fusion)

Mimicing the sun seems like the most efficient way to release energy. While experiments have proven that this is possible, it is not yet practical. Until we can create a sustained fusion reaction that we can control, fusion remains on the list of theoretical energy sources.

### Quantum Energy

### Chi - Energy of the Soul

This may sound funny, but hear me out. If we are part of a simulation, chi may be the only true energy source. It powers the imagination. Perhaps this is all a dream.

## Tradeoffs

To compare energy sources, we need to consider their tradeoffs. What are the things that happen as a result of using a particular energy source?

Fire releases heat energy, as well as smoke and soot.

Damming rivers floods the ecosystem upstream of the river, while introducing a new ecosystem featuring a refreshing lake.

Batteries use chemical energy to power our devices. We all know that batteries work, and they provide a practical way to carry around energy. When batteries are depleted, they end up in a landfill where they leak toxic material.

Whether the tradeoffs are "good" or "bad" is subject to opinion. Do you enjoy breathing fresh air?

Improvements to battery technology allow reuse. Yet improved battery technology may overheat and catch fire.

These lessons set aside hypothetical scenarios. "What if" scenarios tend to introduce fear-based thinking.

- "What if a fire at the local power plant burns down your neighborhood?"
- "What if someone bombs the Hoover Dam?"
- "What if an asteroid hits the earth?"

Rather than being distracted by metaphorical tigers in the jungle of the mind, we will do a dispassionate review of fundamentals.

## Why Nuclear Energy Is Better

Given all of the options we have for extracting energy, what makes nuclear the best option? The rest of this course is dedicated to explaining the strengths of nuclear energy.

:AtomicDivider

Need a break? Take a breather, grab a beverage. Then come on back for more.

Like what you're reading? Why not tell a friend.
