---
title: What about the waste?
description: Opponents of nuclear energy think they have a zinger to shut it down. Educate yourself to avoid their trap.
authors:
  - name: Zanzibar, Nuclear Hero
    to: https://x.com/ZanzibarNuclear
    avatar:
      src: /images/Zanzibar.jpg
      size: xl
image:
  src: /images/news-and-views/nuclear-waste-in-dry-casks.jpg
  caption: 20 years of spent fuel from decommissioned Maine Yankee nuclear plant.
  credit:
    owner: US Office of Nuclear Energy
postedAt: 2024-06-25
published: true
lastUpdate: 2024-06-25
badge:
  label: Myths
---

Opponents of nuclear energy have a few zingers they use to settle a debate. People go for a mic-drop moment so they can leave their debate partner speechless. One of their favorites regarding nuclear as an energy source is, “What about the waste?” Wow, that sounds like a real doozy. We could never have seen that coming, let alone have a prepared answer.

Of course, we can take the high road and start with a charitable assumption that this worrywart is well-intended yet under-informed. We can use this opportunity to help them by explaining how storage of nuclear waste is a solved problem.

Now, in a heated back-and-forth, where your debate partner is more interested in winning in the moment than learning something new, it helps to have a quick explanation backed by pictures. If nothing else, those who observe the exchange can learn from it.

So I always appreciate when someone shares a picture like the one below. The US Office of Nuclear Energy (@GovNuclear) posted on X about how 20 years of spent nuclear fuel is stored in 64 dry casks, concrete cylinders designed to hold radioactive material safely as it decays. The waste for the entire life of the plant is all right here.

:PictureFrame{:src='image.src' :bg='light' :caption='image.caption' :credit='image.credit.owner' :width='400px'}

Really? That’s it? Cool. This would be a great picture to show anyway who is worried about “the waste.” These beauties are so safe you can lean up next to them and nothing will happen to you. They can just sit there until we get better at turning the “waste” into more fuel. A truly renewable resource.

Speaking of storage, I have this faded memory from the 1980s or 90s of an article in some science-y publication, maybe National Geographic or Discover Magazine, about burying nuclear waste under the Rocky Mountains, or in a mile-deep hole in the middle of nowhere USA, far from people. The premise was that this waste is so horrible, you have to get it out of sight to be safe from it and to prevent it from “leaking into the environment.”

At that point, we did not have the benefit of a simple solution put into practice that we can point to and say, “See, that’s all it takes.”

Instead, we had to think through all of the problems of barreling up hazardous materials and transporting them across country by rail to their ultimate resting place underground.

Come to think of it, we like to bury our problems. Out of sight out of mind is not just a quaint expression. What do we do when wind turbines stop working? We bury the blades because…well, you know, it’s like composting. (It’s not like composting.)

Getting back to my original point, the picture of spent fuel in dry casks is the perfect retort. What about the waste? Problem solved.

Now it’s our turn for a mic drop. Almost. Just a quick check of the replies and…what the?

- Them: Yeah, but what if it leaks out?
- Us: Um, it’s solid. There’s no leakage.
- Them: We should send it into space.
- Us: Um, that’s a really bad idea.
  1. It takes energy to put things in orbit.
  2. Thing in orbit eventually fall back to earth.
  3. There’s a non-zero chance of the rocket exploding on the way up.
- Them: We should send it into the sun.
- Us: Okay, that just as bad as sending it to space.
- Them: Well, not into space. Just to the sun.
- Us (to ourselves): _Does he realize the sun is in space?_
- Them (clarifying): I mean where it can burn up and be gone forever.

Something like this exchange had already streaked across the replies. I was merely an observer after the fact. Still, I am siding with the sensible OP as “Us,” versus “Them” who are desperate to get that waste out of sight.

They might have missed the point.

Think about the effects of burning stuff. When people see smoke coming out of factories or coal-burning power plants, or smog from car exhaust, they have a problem with it. And why not? It’s gross.

Yet when the same smoke, the waste if you will, disburses throughout the atmosphere and across the land, it becomes invisible. Forgotten. Even though the source is still belching away.

Germany chose burning coal over splitting atoms. Why? Because of “the waste.” Apparently they have some history of poor storage practices. “Hey, Germany. We have better ways now that you are free to copy. Your neighbor France will show you.”

Thankfully, China has the right idea to transition the other way, from coal to nuclear. You get a “good job” sticker for that.

At this point, our biggest problems with nuclear energy are mental. Luckily, we don’t have to convince everyone because we never will. It just means we can move ahead while others worry about what they imagine.
