---
title: Cosmic Power, Itty Bitty Footprint
description: 'Guess how much land nuclear power uses. (Hint: not much.)'
authors:
  - name: Dave, Nuclear Alchemist
    to: https://www.worldofnuclear.com/profiles-in-nuclear/nuclear-alchemist
    avatar:
      src: https://api.worldofnuclear.com/media/members/3f6ce453-2848-4627-b9c4-6505bed13c96/avatar.jpeg
      size: xl
image:
  src: blog/cosmic-power-tiny-footprint.webp
  caption: 'Spoiler alert: nuclear power uses very little land.'
  credit:
    owner: Nuclear Ambitions LLC
postedAt: 2025-01-02
published: true
lastUpdate: 2025-01-02
badge:
  label: Perspective
---

One benefit of nuclear energy is its incredible energy density. We can extract a large amount of energy in a facility that occupies a small amount of land.

To get a better sense of this, imagine all of the nuclear power plants currently in operation. What if you were put them all in the same location? How much land would they need?

I asked Grok (AI) for some help with the numbers. Feel free to plunk in your own estimates. Grok knows of 419 power reactors in operation, with a combined capacity of 378.1 GW. These reactors supply roughly 13% of global energy demand.

Each reactor takes from 1 to 2 square kilometers (km2) of land. So, the total land use is anywhere from 419 to 838 km2. For my American friends, that's 323 square miles at most.

If you're like me, these numbers still don't mean much. I know that a small room might 100 or 200 square feet. I get how big a football field is, but not in terms of square feet, let alone square miles. We need something of a similar size for comparison.

How about a small country? Luxemburg is a tiny country in Europe, covering 2,586 km2. You can see from the map that all of the nuclear power today (the red square) could fit into one third of Luxembourg, leaving the remaining two thirds for making cheeses and tending flocks (or whatever people in Luxembourg do).

:PictureFrame{src='blog/cosmic-power-tiny-footprint.webp' :bg='light' caption='All nuclear generation could fit inside of Luxemburg'}

Again for my compatriots in the US, let's compare to our smallest state, Rhode Island, which is about 1.5 times bigger than Luxembourg.

Taking this one step further, what if all of the world's energy demand could be satisfied by nuclear power? That would mean adding about 8 times the current capacity. In that case, our co-located power plants would spill a bit into Belgium, or Connecticut. No biggie.

Of course, this is merely a thought experiment. There are practical reasons to have nuclear power distributed around the globe. The point remains that it does not take much land.
