---
title: Nuclear Power Over Will Power
description: 'Put your faith in something real.'
authors:
  - name: Dave, Nuclear Alchemist
    to: https://www.worldofnuclear.com/profiles-in-nuclear/nuclear-alchemist
    avatar:
      src: https://api.worldofnuclear.com/media/members/3f6ce453-2848-4627-b9c4-6505bed13c96/avatar.jpeg
      size: xl
image:
  src: blog/will-power-chocolate-cake.jpg
  caption: 'Will power tends to be in short supply.'
  credit:
    owner: Nuclear Ambitions LLC
postedAt: 2025-01-29
published: true
lastUpdate: 2025-01-29
badge:
  label: Psychology
---

A lot of people put their faith in will power to resist temptations and get through hard times.

Now imagine that will power does not exist. That anything resembling will power is an illusion. In that world, your brain is hard-wired to respond in particular ways given a particular set of stimuli. In this way, every reaction is preloaded, not a matter of exerting effort to choose.

Before you dismiss the idea, consider one of the helpful side effects. Not having the excuse of "free will" may be a way to rationalize your bad behavior. "I couldn't help it. I am not really in control of myself."

Recently I was standing at the baggage carousel after a return flight. In a pleasant surprise, my bags came out first. The airport runs non-stop reminders that "many bags look alike," so a took a quick peak at the tag on my bag and lifted the suitcase to the floor.

Someone next to me asked, "Are you sure that's yours?" I snapped back with a sarcastic "Yeah, I know how to read." My teenage daughter, who is kinder than I, informed me that I was being rude. That got me thinking about the exchange.

As we walked to the ride-share zone, I replayed the scene a few times in my head. My first conclusion was that he started it. Rather than what he said, I heard what I thought he implied. "Are you sure you're not an idiot?"

On further consideration, perhaps my daughter was right, and my reaction took it too far. Maybe his bag is similar to the one I grabbed, and he was worried about me walking off with his stuff.

Could I have used will power to be a better person? No, "will power" would have required a conscious effort, and I was running on auto-pilot. More patience would have helped. Maybe even empathy to consider the perspective of my fellow traveler.

Let's revisit my early statement that the lack of will power implies a lack of control. In the moment, that may be true. However, with a bit of effort, we can improve ourselves by reprograming our brains to produce better responses to stimuli.

Hypnosis is one approach that works. Either through auto-suggestion or with the help of a hypnotist, you relax and open your mind to suggestion. Based on my example, I might tell myself to take a deep breath before responding to a question. I might visualize being grateful that I am alive.

Sarcasm tends to disappear when you feel relaxed and happy.

Reframing is another way to modify how your brain interprets stimuli. Say you want to stop eating sugary foods. Find a short phrase that puts sugar in a different light. Something like "refined sugar is gross." Then when you see cake, instead of "yum," your brain will think "yuck!" You might go find an apple.

While you may still believe in will power, there is a fair chance that it can be explained away by other provable phenomena, such as genetics, brain chemistry, pattern recognition, and reflexes.

At this point, perhaps your curiosity has you wondering how nuclear energy contrasts with will power. Let's think about that.

For starters, nuclear power is quite real. We know how to split atoms (fission), and we are learning how to combine them (fusion). The heat from manipulating atoms provides energy, which makes things go round and round, which makes electrons move through wires, giving you electricity for you to thrive.

Also, nuclear power will never be depleted for the duration of the universe. It doesn't just "run out" like free will does. Nuclear power plants are steady work-horses, able to provide what's known as "baseload" power, a reliable level of clean energy to handle the vast majority of undulating demand.

Nuclear power is actual power, the ability to do work, to make things move. You can measure it in Watts or horsepower. On the other hand, what is a unit of will power? Why don't we have a will-power meter to inform us when we're running low?

We have been releasing nuclear energy from atoms for decades. Regions that run on nuclear power benefit from reliable energy and clean air. Plus, running a nuclear power plant takes skills and teamwork, offering meaningful employment to the communities they serve.

Over the same decades, many have relied on "will power" to refrain from drinking alcohol or eating extra dessert, or to resist other temptations. How has that worked out?

Relying on will power is a lot like relying on wind or solar power. It comes and goes. If that was all we had, you would have to plan your day around moments when you believe the energy will be available. The cost of these "renewables" fluctuates like mad, kind of a famine or feast. And when the weather is not cooperating, chances are good that someone ends up burning things to fill the gap.

In conclusion, as you try to wrap your head around the notion that "will power" is not real, nuclear reactors continue to provide clean, abundant energy wherever they are. You don't even have to think about it.
