---
title: Why Nuclear Power
description: 'How nuclear energy becomes electricity'
authors:
  - name: Dave, Nuclear Alchemist
    to: https://www.worldofnuclear.com/profiles-in-nuclear/nuclear-alchemist
    avatar:
      src: https://api.worldofnuclear.com/media/members/3f6ce453-2848-4627-b9c4-6505bed13c96/avatar.jpeg
      size: xl
image:
  src: blog/tea-time-w-nuclear.webp
  caption: 'Enough energy to make tea for generations.'
  credit:
    owner: Nuclear Ambitions LLC
postedAt: 2023-10-01
published: true
lastUpdate: 2023-10-01
badge:
  label: Persuasion
---

My guess is that most people have no idea how nuclear energy is converted to electricity. Without understanding how this happens, people are vulnerable to persuasion that sounds convincing but is meant to turn them away from nuclear.

What people hear is the bad news, that nuclear power leaves nuclear waste that stays radioactive for thousands of years, and radioactivity gives you cancer, which can kill you. Death is bad, so nuclear is bad. Q.E.D.

When that sort of message is the headline, it’s easy to overlook the fact that most nuclear power plants have been quietly generate power through the years without nearly as much harmful impact as, say, a power plant that continuously spews the smoke from burning coal. Breathing polluted air is bad, too.

The fact is, as safe and clean as nuclear already is, the entire industry is working on ways to improve on a number of aspects. These improvements are part of Generation IV (sounds like “Jen 4”). Before we get into any of that, we should establish a baseline for thinking about nuclear power.

So let’s take a moment, step away from scary headlines, and understand what happens to turn the energy of atoms into electricity for the device you are using to read this.

## The Energy of an Atom

The best way we know to release energy is by mimicking the stars, like the Sun. Inside the Sun, the pressure is so immense that atoms are smashed together to form different atoms. In particular, two hydrogen atoms combine to form a helium atom. In the process of combining, extra bits are turned into pure energy. When that energy shoots off the surface of the Sun, it travels through space until it hits something, like the Earth. Nuclear energy gives us light, heat, and sunburns.

Combining atoms is called fusion. In this case, two atoms are fused together into one. None of the world’s nuclear power plants work this way, but this is a good place to make a point. When you mess with atoms, they can release a lot of energy.

Maybe you will never understand why this happens. There’s no shame in that. After all, it took a genius like Einstein to figure out the formula for converting physical substance (called matter or mass) into electricity.

You may have seen this famous equation:

E = mc^2 (TODO: need a way to show equations)

We can put this into words. E is the amount of energy. The amount of stuff, or mass, is m. ‘c’ is the speed of light. The raised little 2 means you multiply c times itself. The main idea of this equation is that energy and matter are related. You can turn one into the other. How much energy you get depends on how much stuff there is and how fast light goes.

Light goes so fast that you end up getting a lot of energy from a small amount of stuff. The speed of light is 300,000,000 meters per second, or 671,000,000 miles per hour (for my American friends). That’s one heck of a speeding ticket if you get caught going that fast.

To make matters worse—or better in the case of useful energy—we have to multiply 300,000,000 by itself.

TODO: 300,000,000 m/s \times 300,000,000 m/s = 90,000,000,000,000,000 m^2/s^s

You have to admit, that’s a crazy big number. Take a moment…thousands, millions, billions, trillions… What comes after trillions? 90 quadrillion meters squared per second squared. Honestly, we are talking about numbers that are so big we have no good way to relate to them.

Also, consider the units. We can relate to “meters squared” as an area, like a table top or the size of a home. What the heck is a “second squared?”

Putting the units aside for a moment (or longer), this number is just too big. We have to boil it down to something we know. Hold that thought.

Going in the direction of things that are incredibly small, we can talk about the mass of a hydrogen atom, the smallest atom there is. Let’s write this out, starting with a decimal point.

TODO: 0.0000000000000000000000016735575 grams

And once again, we are lost. We cannot conceive just how small atoms, the fundamental building blocks, are. We never interact with individual atoms. Still, given enough time with these number, they can become familiar. It helps that we have clever ways to write them, allowing us to group small things by general size: microscopic, atomic, sub-atomic, and so on.

Despite that illusion, things this small are just not relatable. Instead, I like to imagine that I can shrink myself down to their size. Ant Man, meet Zanzibar, Nuclear Hero. We will use that trick at another time.

Getting back to our discussion of energy, on Earth, a single raisin weighs about a gram (gm). That raisin is made of elements, including hydrogen, carbon, oxygen and a whole lot more, that are similar in size. By talking about a raisin, we have something in mind that we can relate to. This is why we use approximations, ideas that are close enough to understand without being exact.

If we convert one raisin worth of matter (mass) into energy, we get:

TODO: 1gm \times c \times c = 90 terajoules

90 what? Terajoules has two parts. “Tera” means trillion, and a Joule is a measure of energy. So in theory, the mass of a raisin be converted into 90 trillion “bits of energy.” That sounds like a lot because it’s a big number. But how much is it?

## Tea Time

To help get a sense of how much energy we are talking about, let’s make green tea.

:PictureFrame{:src='blog/tea-time-w-nuclear.webp' :bg='light' :caption='image.caption'}

In my cabinet, I have a few styles of green tea cup. On average, they hold about 5 ounces of liquid. Tea is mostly water, and it takes 4 Joules of energy to raise the temperature of an ounce of water by 1°Celsius. That means it takes 20 Joules to heat a cup of tea 1°C.

Imagine our kettle has been filled with water since yesterday, the last time we made tea. That means the water is at room temperature, 20°C. Also, pretend it has just enough water for our cup of tea. Also, pretend we use a thermometer to heat the water to the perfect temperature for steeping green tea, 70°C. We are going to add just enough heat energy to raise the temperature by 50°C.

TODO: 5 ounces \times 50°C \times \frac{4Joules}{ounces\,°C} = 1,000Joules

In summary, you need about 1,000 Joules of energy to enjoy a cup of green tea. Dividing 90 trillion by one thousand, we conclude that one raisin worth of energy can produce 90 billion cups of tea. As it stands, the world is approaching 8 billion people. So, using the energy of a single raisin, the whole world can have a hot cup of green tea every day for about 11 days.

Do you believe it? Are you impressed yet?

## Return to the Real World

As amazing as that example is, we do not have a direct way to convert matter to energy. Instead, we have to mash very small things together and see what happens. When we mash together two hydrogen atoms, they form a helium atom. When you compare the mass of the original atoms to the mass of new atom, a little bit is missing. That bit got converted to energy. Even though it’s just a fraction of the energy in our example above, it adds up quickly.

Lots of smart people are working on nuclear fusion because the output, or “waste,” is helium, which does not kill you. We like to put in balloons, and breathing it makes us talk funny. As enjoyable as that sounds, the technology is not quite ready for large-scale use, say, to produce electricity at a power plant.

There is another way to mess with atoms called fission. That is when we cause large atoms to split into smaller ones.

To understand fission, we first need to go smaller. Atoms are made of smaller particles. They have a nucleus that is a collection of nucleons—protons and neutrons—and an outer swarm of electrons. The number of protons determines what kind of atom it is. Hydrogen has 1 proton, helium has 2, lithium has 3, and so on. Neutrons add weight and affect how stable the atom is.

To help understand fission, imagine that nucleons are golf balls. Let’s use green golf balls for protons and white ones for neutrons. These golf balls are special, almost magnetic but in a weird way. First of all, they float and arrange themselves into a sphere. Also, when you put them close enough to each other but not too close, they stick together.

:PictureFrame{:src='blog/nuclear-golf-balls.webp' :bg='light' :caption='Imagine these are protons. Neutrons would be slightly larger.'}

For example, an atom of gold has 79 protons and 118 neutrons. So picture a mixture of 186 green and white golf balls floating as a sphere that’s held together by magical forces.

Gold is nice. It is also quite stable and difficult to split. We need to look at bigger atoms. You may have heard about uranium. That’s because it is the largest type of atom found in nature, mostly underground. Uranium has 92 protons, but it comes in a few different sizes, depending on the number of neutrons. Most uranium has 146 neutrons. That is called U-238 (92 + 146 = 238), which is also stable. Another kind is U-235, with 143 neutrons (92 + 143 = 235). This one is ripe.

Now let’s have some fun. Grab an extra neutron – here, we made a pile for you. Pick any one. They are all the same. Throw that neutron at an atom of U-235. If you throw it at just the right speed and you hit it smack in the middle, that atom will split into two or more parts. The arrangement of U-235 is unstable enough that getting smack by the extra neutron is too much.

The atom splits violently. Not only is energy released, a couple of extra neutrons are sent flying. If they happen to hit a neighboring atom of U-235, that will split, too, releasing more energy and neutrons. That continuation is called a chain reaction, and it’s how a nuclear reactor core keeps itself going.

## Finally, How Nuclear Energy Becomes Electricity

That’s a lot to think about. The good news is that you don’t have to know much more than that to understand how nuclear energy becomes electricity. What you just learned is that nuclear reactions, both fusion and fission, release energy. That energy goes into whatever is nearby and becomes heat.

One type of power plant uses energy to heat water, turning it to steam. The steam is sent through a turbine that spins an electrical generator that is connected to the electrical grid that your house is connected to. In a way, it’s that simple. Boil water, spin some magnets, send electricity down a wire, and charger your phone.

Of course, each step of that process involves massive, complicated machinery. We can get into the details of all of it. Another day.

Next time, we will look at different energy sources for boiling water (fossil fuels, nuclear fission, and cracks in the earth), and alternate ways to spin generators (like falling water). We can also take a peak at photovoltaics (like solar panels), which generate electricity without spinning anything.

With that information, you will be able to form your own opinions about the best sources of power. Maybe I’ll convince you that it’s nuclear energy.

Meanwhile, have some more tea. It’s good for you.
