---
title: "Zanzi's World, v1"
description: 'A glimse at what the World of Nuclear used to be'
authors:
  - name: Dave, Nuclear Alchemist
    to: https://www.worldofnuclear.com/profiles-in-nuclear/nuclear-alchemist
    avatar:
      src: https://api.worldofnuclear.com/media/members/3f6ce453-2848-4627-b9c4-6505bed13c96/avatar.jpeg
      size: xl
image:
  src: blog/zanzis-world-v1.webp
  caption: "Zanzi's world was build on the Quasar framework"
  credit:
    owner: Nuclear Ambitions LLC
postedAt: 2025-05-07
published: true
lastUpdate: 2025-05-07
badge:
  label: Persuasion
---

## A blast from the past

Believe it or not, the World of Nuclear has been evolving for about 8 years. Originally, I wanted to put together a digital magazine called Power Up.Then I decided Power Up needed a mascot of sorts. AI was just getting good enough to generate avatars. So Zanzibar was born.

:PictureFrame{:src='image.src' :bg='light' :caption='image.caption' :credit='image.credit.owner'}

I used the Quasar framework, which was the hottest new thing for building apps using Vue JS, the main competitor to React. I liked the way Vue was run, and I loved the fact that Quasar came with everything you need to get the kind of app you see here.

One idea was to provide a lesson builder so that creative people with knowledge could put together entire courses of instruction. Once a lesson was published, students would be able to enlighten themselves. A nice little ecosystem (in my imagination, at least).

:PictureFrame{:src='blog/zanzis-world-lesson-lab.webp' :bg='light' :caption='The Lesson Lab' :credit='image.credit.owner'}

"Well, what happened?" you might ask. Technology moved on, and I went with it. Basically, Quasar was great for javascript, but not so for typescript. And through my paid work, I learned about Nuxt JS. "So long, Quasar. It was fun."

Also, I decided to simplify the title of this platform to "World of Nuclear," allowing Zanzibar to play the host. Plus, Zanzibar got a facelift.
