---
title: What is an Atom?
description: Learn what an atom is and what it is made of.
published: true
---

# What is an Atom?

Atoms are the smallest bits of recognizable stuff that cannot be separated into smaller bits of recognizable stuff. They are the fundamental building blocks of all substances. Everything we touch, taste, and smell is made of combinations of atoms.

Atoms are tiny. Individual atoms are smaller than you can see. Only specialized electronic equipment is able to paint a picture of what its sensors detect. Here's a recent picture of an atom.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/atom-says-cheese.jpg' caption='Photo of a single hydrogen atom taken in 2013 using a quantum microscope.'}

Every atom is a combination of three parts. Two of the parts, protons and neutrons, are found at the center in a nucleus. Atoms have one or more protons and almost always one or more neutrons. (Only the smallest atom of hydrogen has no neutrons.) Surrounding the nucleus, buzzing around at various distances, you will find one or more electrons. Protons, neutrons, and electrons. That's it.

If you took a science class in high school, you have probably seen a picture of an atom. Depending on the drawing, you may have some ideas of how an atom looks that are different from the picture above.

For example, we might draw an atom like this.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/simple-atom.svg' width='400' caption='Classic model of an atom'}

There's a bit of stuff in the middle, which is the nucleus, and the electrons are zooming around the nucleus in orbits. This picture goes back to the days of Niels Bohr, a physicist who was one of the early thinkers about atoms.

Another way to show this is with the electrons occupying concentric shells at specific distances from the nucleus, like this.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/simple-atom-orbits.svg' width='400' caption='An atom draw with orbiting electrons'}

This picture is easy to understand if you think of how moons orbit a planet, or how planets orbit a star. In reality, things are more complicated. Think of these drawings as sketches that ignore some of the details.

For instance, notice in the picture of a real atom how everything is fuzzy. Also, the drawing leads you to think that atoms are flat, when we know that atoms occupy 3-dimensional space, more like a ball than a frisbee.

The nucleus is a collection of spheres, like a bag of marbles, but without the bag to hold them together. Instead, the spheres (called nuclei) are held together by nuclear force that attracts them to each other. Also, the nuclei are themselves made of even smaller particles called quarks. An electron is one of the lepton particles. As for the other leptons, well, you can study particle physics to learn more about that.

For our purposes, we will stick to protons, neutrons and electrons. That's all we need to understand atoms.

Nuclei and electrons as so small, they operate in the quantum realm, where the rules of physics are unlike what we are used to. The laws of quantum mechanics are unintuitive. If you have seen any movies based on comic books, say where people shrink to the size of insects, and then shrink some more to enter the quantum realm…what you saw is not quite accurate.

What we know is that things at that tiny scale become fuzzy and uncertain. For example, looking back at our atom drawings, do electrons really zoom around the nucleus in smooth, neat orbits? They do not. Instead, electrons turn into waves when we are not looking, only looking solid for a moment when we take a peek. When you are not looking, they could be anywhere and in multiple places at the same time. Essentially vibrating like crazy within a given small space. Quite strange.

More recent models of electrons show them in a cloud. That conveys a more fuzzy feeling, and shows how they tend to cluster.

Quantum mechanics is another branch of physics that you might want to study. For now, remember that things at the quantum scale are fuzzy, jittery, and uncertain. Random.

In this course, we have a certain way of drawing atoms that conveys important information without being too difficult to draw.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/models/He.svg' width='300' caption='Newer model of a helium atom, closer to reality'}

In our "artist's rendition" of a helium atom, protons are purple. Neutrons are green and slightly larger than protons. Electrons are yellow and are seen at the edge of a yellow shell (or hollow sphere) that surrounds the nucleus. The shading is meant to give the particles a spherical feel.

Room for improvement? Certainly. Good enough for now? Yes.

At this point, you should have a decent idea about what an atom is.
