---
title: Atomic Stability
description: Learn about stability and how it is measured.
published: true
---

# Atomic Stability

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/strong-force.svg' width='300' caption='nuclear strong force'}

Some properties of atoms are related to their stability, the likelihood that an atom will stay the same. A stable atom will not change without a major disturbance.

There are two ways an atom can be unstable. When an atom is unstable due to its electrons, we say it is chemically reactive. When an atom is unstable due to its protons and neutrons, we say it is radioactive. Let's take a moment to understand each of these ideas.

## Chemical Stability

First, we can look at the atom from the outside, where the electrons hang out. Electrons have dedicated spaces at particular distances from the nucleus. We can think of them as occupying spherical shells, one surrounding the other.

To form a useful mental picture, imagine an unbroken egg shell that is perfectly round, like a ball that's filled with air. The nucleus is at the center with a gap between the nucleus and the shell. Now imagine a larger shell surrounding the first with a bit of a gap between them. Then another, and so on. The largest atoms in nature that we know about have seven concentric shells full of electrons.

We also imagine an 8th shell, but that's only in discussion of hypothetical atoms, what could be if only we could find one. Let's leave that to theoretical physicists.

Speaking of theories, our ideas of how things work are always subject to improvement. To make this image of electrons more realistic, we need to make one more adjustment. Rather than a shell with a hard edge, think of it more as a spherical cloud. The electrons can be anywhere inside the cloud, although they are most likely to be somewhere near the edge.

Have you ever seen an old time photograph where people had to remain absolutely still? If they didn't, they would end up blurry in the picture. That's how the electrons look because they are moving around so much, you can't quite pin them down. But you can still see that they are in the picture.

That image of electrons, called the electron cloud model, is good to have, although it's not so easy to imagine. Instead, we will keep talking about shells, which are a reasonable approximation of reality.

Getting back to reality, space for electrons in each shell is limited. The first shell, called "K" (yes, the capital letter k), has room for only two electrons. The next shell, L, can hold another eight electrons. After that, additional electrons go in a third shell, M, and so on and so forth.

Here's a picture that shows an atom of magnesium with 12 electrons occupying three shells.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/models/Mg.svg' caption='An atom of magnesium' width='300' credit='Nuclear Ambitions LLC' creditUrl='https://www.nuclearambitions.com'}

Beyond the first two shells, atoms can pack in a lot more electrons per shell. For example, in an atom of potassium, the M (3rd) shell has 8 electrons, and the N shell has 1. In caesium, which is a larger atom, all 55 electrons in caesium are spread across six shells, and the M shell has 18 electrons.

Chemists have a compact way to show how many electrons are in in each shell, combining the shell letter with the number of electrons. For caesium, it looks like this:

> K2 L8 M18 N18 O8 P1 Q0 R0

The largest atom discovered so far is oganesson, which holds 188 electrons in seven shells. Massive. And still ridiculously tiny. It's electron shells look like this:

> K2 L8 M18 N32 O32 P18 Q8 R0

_Fun fact._ Electrons can behave like particles or waves. They are so small that they follow the laws of quantum mechanics, well beyond the scope of this course. Just remember that, although our pictures show electrons as stationary dots, in reality electrons vibrate and move all around. The shell is more like the boundary where you'll often find them flitting around.

## Nuclear Stability

Second, turn your attention to the nucleus. If you put two or more positively charged particles together (protons), what should happen? Electromagnetic forces should push them apart. Yet they somehow stay together. So there must be an attractive force to balance out the electromagnetic force and hold them together. This is where neutrons get involved by applying a nuclear force. In particular, this is called the "strong" nuclear.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/strong-force.svg' width='300' caption='nuclear strong force'}

If there's a strong force, you might guess there is also a "weak" force. In fact, the weak force is internal to protons and neutrons. It is important for different reasons. The weak force is involved in a magic trick, where neutrons to turn into protons and vice versa. Wicked.

It turns out that the number of neutrons in an atom has a lot to do with its stability. Say you have a nice bundle of protons and neutrons, and then you shove in a few more neutrons. You'd probably make things a bit unstable. The atom might struggle to find an arrangement that keeps everybody happy. With "too many" (or even "too few") neutrons, an atom will throw off bits of itself, along with a lot of energy. That's nuclear energy.

Starting to make sense?

Other lessons have a lot more to say about nuclear stability, or in particular when things are unstable.
