---
title: Isotopes, Isotones, and Isobars
description: Learn about how we compare atoms, with new vocabulary.
published: true
---

## Iso...things

When we talked about elements, we focused our attention on the number of proton in an atom. The atomic number, which is equal to the number of protons, tells us what kind of element we have.

But there is more to the story. Atoms have lots of variations. For instance, you can add or remove neutrons from an atom without changing its basic nature.

Atoms with the same atomic number (number of protons) but different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes.

Consider a simple example. Take a hydrogen atom, with one proton and one electron. You can add a neutron, and you get a variation of hydrogen called deuterium. Add another neutron, so now you have a proton and 2 neutrons, and you get tritium, a third variation.

Neat.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/models/H-H2-H3.svg' width='300' caption='Isotopes of hydrogen'}

We will spend more time talking about isotopes in a moment. Before we do that, let's spend a moment with a couple more definitions.

First, atoms that have different atomic numbers but the same number of neutrons are called isotones. I know, that word is awfully similar to isotopes. How about a quick example? Tritium (in the picture) and helium are isotones because they both have two neutrons but different atomic numbers.

How about another example? Nitrogen normally has 7 protons and 7 neutrons. The isotope of nitrogen with one less neutron, nitrogen-13, is an isotone of carbon, both having 6 neutrons.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/models/N-N13-C.svg' width='300' caption='Isotones'}

Spend a moment with this picture until it clicks.

The last term is what we call different elements with the same atomic mass, isobars. Picture different elements, and then add or remove neutrons until the isotopes all have same weight. Super.

In summary, when you want to know what kind of atom you are dealing with, atomic number is the first key. That tells you what the element is based on the number of protons. The isotope is the second key. That tells you how many neutrons for a given element.

## Isotope Chart

Scientists who study isotopes came up with a clever chart that shows them all. The picture below was borrowed from CERN, the agency in Switzerland that "probe[s] the fundamental structure of particles that make up everything around us." Many thanks to CERN for sharing their knowledge.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/CERN-isotope-chart.jpg' caption='Chart of isotopes' width='800'}

If you haven't already, take a moment to study this picture. Every isotope is a dot on the graph. Starting in the lower left corner, the number of protons increases as you move up, and the number of neutrons increases as you move to the right.

It's a bit too small to see the details, which is fine for now. The point is to see all known isotopes of every element in the universe. It's the map of everything.

Rest assured that hydrogen is the dot on the far left, where the neutron count is 0. In the next column, we have a single neutron, deuterium, helium-3, and lithium-4. And so on.

The colors show you how stable an isotope is, which leads us to the next topic, radioactive decay.
