---
title: Radioactivity
description: Learn about radioactivity and its properties.
published: true
---

## When Atoms Decay

You have reached the most dynamic and exciting lesson about atoms. This is where we talk about how atoms change. In our ordinary experience with atoms, they are stable, unchanging. While we observe chemical reactions from mixing things together, it takes special equipment to detect changes to individual atoms. When an atom's nucleus changes, energetic stuff comes bursting out. That is called radioactivity.

In the lesson about isotopes, we talk about how the nucleus of an atom can become unstable when it has too many or too few neutrons. When an atom is unstable, it is likely to go through radioactive decay. This happens until the atom settles into a more stable arrangement.

All elements have isotopes that are radioactive, although most of these are man-made (that is, not natural) and do not survive for long. To see what I mean, let's take another look at the chart of isotopes.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/CERN-isotope-chart.jpg' caption='Chart of isotopes' width='800'}

Remember that the vertical axis represents the atomic number, which tells you what the element is. The horizontal axis is the number of neutrons.

The colors represent an isotope's half-life. For now, think of half-life as a way to know how long it takes for a radioactive isotope to change into something else. The red dots show isotopes that change in under one-tenth of a second (< 0.1s). Dark orange are isotopes that decay between one-tenth and three seconds. Light orange isotopes decay between three seconds and two minutes. And so on.

Stable isotopes can be found along the black line of dots through the center of that colorful feather. Notice how the colors turn hotter to the left and right of the black line. The farther an isotope gets from "normal," the sooner they want to change into something else.

Now move your eyes to the upper right portion of the feather. See the label 208Pb? That's a stable isotope of lead. Try to find a black dot to the right of that. Not so much. There's a lot more purple, which is still relatively stable, taking between one and 1 billion years to change. These isotopes are so big that they have trouble settling down.

## Half-life

Before we move on, let's clarify the meaning of half-life using a real-life example.

Imagine you have a sample of radioactive iodine-131. Why would you have this sample? Radioactive iodine is used for treating certain kinds of cancer, and it saves a lot of lives. One of the reasons it is useful is that its half-life is about 8 days. It does it's work of killing nasty cells rather quickly, but also slowly enough to have time it to get it from where it's manufactured (in a nuclear reactor) into a patient while it is still potent.

Over time, that sample – or since it's used as medicine, we can call it a dosage – of iodine-131 will go through radioactive decay. In fact, half of the dosage will decay within the first 8 days, leaving you with half of the dosage remaining. In another 8 days, half of what is left will decay. So in 16 days, you have a quarter of the original dose. In 8 more days, half of what is left will decay, leaving you with an eighth (1/8) of the original.

We can use that example to figure out what half-life means. It's the amount of time it takes for half of a sample of a radioactive isotope to decay.

Half-life is measured in units of time: seconds, minutes, days, and years. Something with a short half-life is highly radioactive; it will decay very quickly. The following graph shows a decay curve. Each tick on the x-axis represents one half-life, whatever that duration of time might be.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/half-life_Sample-size-vs-Time.svg' width='800' caption='Decay curve'}

Next, let's take a look at the three common types of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and the favorite of green superheros, gamma.

## Alpha Radiation

One way for decay to happen is for a group of four nucleons, 2 protons and 2 neutrons, to head out together. That's called alpha decay. You might recognize the alpha particle (below) as the nucleus of a helium atom.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/radiation-alpha.svg' width='500' caption='Alpha partical'}

Compared to helium, do you notice something missing? That's right, there are no electrons. That means an alpha particle has a charge of +2 because there are no (negative) electrons to balance out the two (positive) protons. The alpha particle is going to steal electrons from whatever it touches first. Hmm, stealing is such a harsh word. Instead we call it ionization. You can see how that might be a bit destructive to whatever gets ionized (stolen from).

On the bright side, alpha radiation is relatively big and slow. Literally the first thing it contacts will also stop it. You should be okay with a bit of shielding between your body and the radiation source. (Nuclear safety is a great topic for another lesson.)

Would you like an example of alpha decay? Yes, let's see one.

Uranium-238 is relatively stable when it's just sitting around. It has a half-life of 4.5 billion years. Still, once in a while, atoms of U-238 go through alpha decay. Uranium has atomic number 92, and an alpha particle has 2 protons, leaving the atom with 90 protons. The element with atomic number 90 is…[looks at periodic table]…thorium. Since the alpha particle takes 4 nucleons, we are left with thorium-234.

Good? Easy to follow? If not, take your time. You might need to unpack that example a bit to grasp what's going on.

## Beta Radiation

Another kind of radioactive decay happens when a neutron decides it would rather be a proton. After all, protons have all the fun with their positive outlook on life. Remember how a neutron is slightly bigger than a proton? Well, it is. So as it turns into a proton, an electron pops out and flies away. This is called beta decay. That's what the next picture is trying to show you.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/radiation-beta.svg' width='500' caption='Beta partical'}

As you may recall, an electron is tiny compared to a proton or neutron, and a helium nucleus has four nuclei, so it's even bigger. Plus, this beta particle (electron) has lots of energy, so it moves fast. Due to the beta particle's size and speed, it takes something like a block of wood to stop it.

If you think that throwing high-energy, negatively charged electrons around seems destructive, you're right. Remember iodine-131 from a few minutes ago? That gets absorbed by cancer cells. When it goes through beta decay, the beta particle damages or kills the cell. That's a good thing. However, in most cases, you want to shield yourself from beta radiation.

How about a happier example of beta decay? Yes, please.

This time we consider carbon-14, a naturally occurring isotope of carbon that is radioactive. It's half-life is about 5,730 years, so it takes a while for these atoms to decay. When they do, they go through beta decay.

Carbon has the atomic number 6, since there are six protons in carbon. In carbon-14, one of the 8 neutrons (14 - 6 = 8) turns into a proton. At this point, the atom has atomic number 7 because of the extra proton, and 7 neutrons remain. That means radioactive carbon turns into a stable atom of nitrogen through beta decay.

To be super precise, when the beta particle (electron) is spit out, an antineutrino is also ejected because real-life change is complicated. If you want to know more details like this, check out particle physics.

By the way, carbon-14 is used to detect the age of artifacts. When a tree grows, it absorbs carbon, and some portion of that carbon is carbon-14. Archeologists take samples of organic matter in the area of a dig and measure how much carbon-14 is left in the sample. With a little bit of math, you can determine how long ago that matter was alive. That knowledge makes archeologists happy.

## Gamma Radiation

A third kind of decay happens when at atom gets excited. Literally, when an atom has extra energy, it is known to be in an excited state. In order for the atom to settle down and return to ground state—its normal baseline energy—it shoots out a high-energy photon. A photon is a short wave, a little burst of electromagnetic energy. The official name for this kind of photo is gamma radiation. Or you can call it by its cute name, gamma ray.

That paragraph is full of new words. We will break things down piece by piece, starting with photons.

As you just read, a photo is a wave. For a given wave, the distance between two of its peaks is called the wavelength. Light is photons with relatively long wavelengths. Don't laugh, but a "long" wavelength, like for the color red, is about 700 nanometers. The wavelength for violet is about half that at 380 nanometers.

If you are wondering what a nanometer is, but you are too embarrassed to raise your hand, it's okay. We could use more practice in thinking small. One meter is roughly one yard, which is three feet, as in the length of the thing at the end of the leg of an average adult human. Three of those end to end - about a meter.

Now divide that distance into 1,000 equal parts. Each part is a millimeter (1,000th of a meter, or 10-3 m). Do that again, and you have a micrometer. Do that again, and you have a nanometer. 10-9 meters.

A photon of light is just the right wavelength to interact with the retina in your eye, which is why you can see it. As the wavelength gets smaller, the photons become invisible. Ultra-violet is the next range of wavelengths, visible to insects and a variety of animals. Go smaller still and you have x-rays, good for passing through soft tissue but not as easily through bones. We can examine a skeleton without removing the useful stuff surrounding it.

Gamma rays have the smallest wavelengths, coming in at under 10 picometers, or 10 x 10-12 meters. They also carry the most energy. Over 100 thousand electron-volts, whatever that is. Sounds like a lot in any case. We will talk a lot more about energy in a different course.

Next we will touch on the concepts of excited and ground states. An atom can have extra energy for a couple of reasons. One of those is beta decay. Some of the energy goes into the beta particle, and some is held by the nucleus. Take a look at the drawing of gamma radiation.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/atoms/radiation-gamma.svg' width='500' caption='Gamma partical'}

On the left, you see an atom in an excited state. The orange squiggles represent the energy. At some point, that energy turns into a gamma ray that leaves the atom, represented by the orange wave at the top with the squiggly arrow pointing to the right. What's left is the same atom in its ground (low-energy) state.

Are you ready for another example? Of course you are.

This time we present the mighty isotope cobalt-60. When regular cobolt-59 takes on an extra neutron, things get exciting. First cobolt-60 goes through beta decay, turning one of its neutrons into a proton. So now it's an atom of nickel, but that nickel is super excited. It has so much extra energy that it blasts off two gamma rays: pyew, pyew. (In case you missed it, that's the sound effect of a ray gun.) In the end, we have nickel-60 in its ground state, and it happens to be a stable isotope, so that is the end.

Did you like that one? Sometimes it takes more than one adjustment for an atom to relax.

What makes gamma rays so dangerous is that they go through just about anything with a lot of energy. Even worse, their wavelength matches the size of DNA, causing genetic mutations and other damage. This is the stuff of monsters with too many eyes or extra appendages.

Supposedly gamma rays can turn an inspired scientist into a conflicted superhero (or super villain). In reality that scientist would cease to be among the living.

Long-term exposure to gamma rays damages non-living things, too, like metals, semiconductors (circuitry), and crystalline materials. People who study material science look for alternatives that are resilient against gamma rays.

Before you lose all hope, realize that gamma rays are not invincible. They can be stopped by a thick sheet of lead or hunk of concrete. Lead shielding and concrete walls keep things safe, as long as the materials that emit gamma radiation are inside.

And for goodness sake, don't point a beam of them at your chest in the hopes of just the right mutation.

## Decay Chains

This is the last topic in this lesson, and brings together lots of what you just learned. So that's rewarding.

Let's return to our sample of iodine-131. We can use that to talk about a fascinating concept called a decay chain.

What happens when an atom of iodine-131 decays? Well, as we said, it happens to go through beta decay, turning a neutron into a proton and emitting an electron and some other stuff. Adding a proton changes the atomic number. In the case of iodine, beta decay turns it into xenon, a noble gas. Xenon is stable, so all it well.

That transition happens to be the last step in a long series of beta decays. For iodine, one possible chain looks like this.

Start with silver-131 by bombarding regular silver (Z47) with neutrons. Silver-131 has a half-life of 35 milliseconds (ms). A millisecond is 1,000/th of a second. Yes, that's fast! Quicker than a blink.

- Silver-131 beta decays into cadmium-131, with a half-life of 68 ms.
- Cadmium-131 beta-decays into indium-131, half-life 0.28 seconds (s).
- Indium-131 beta-decays into tin-131, half-life 56 s.
- Tin-131 beta-decays into tellurium-131, half-life 25 minutes (min).
- Tellurium-131 turns into iodine-131, half-life 8 days.
- Iodine-131 turns into xenon-131, half-life infinite.

In the end, we have xenon until the end of time. No harm in that.

If you study this long enough, you may notice a couple of things. First, see how each step in the chain results in an isotope that is more stable than the previous one? Compare any isotope to another further down the list. The half-life always gets longer. It goes from milliseconds to tenths of a second to seconds, then minutes, then days, then forever.

Second, if you step back for a moment, you might notice we are talking about turning one bit of stuff into a different kind of stuff. This is alchemy. You don't need magic incantations, symbolic drawings that summon the spirits, or special mental powers. All you need is alpha decay, or a source of extra neutrons plus beta decay. (Come to think of it, mental powers help, too.)

Alchemy is alive and well in nuclear science.
