---
title: First Law
description: Learn about the first law of thermodynamics.
published: true
---

# First Law of Thermodynamics

When people talk about energy conservation, they are usually talking about our use of energy. Turning off unused lights, using less air conditioning, or upgrading to newer, more efficient appliances. Walking to the store instead of driving. That sort of thing.

When we talk about conservation of energy in physics, we have a different concept in mind, something far more fundamental.

This brings us to the first law of thermodynamics.

> Energy cannot be created or destroyed. Energy is only transferred or converted from one form to another.

In other words, the total amount of energy is always the same, even when it is not serving the needs of humans.

This is good to know because it is based in reality. In fact, we already have an intuition for this truth from our everyday experiences.

Think about making a cup of tea. There are a few ways to heat the water to the right temperature. You can start a fire and hang a kettle over the flames. You can put the kettle on a gas or electric stove. You can put a mug of water in a microwave oven. In each case, an energy source releases energy that goes into the water.

Some of the energy radiates transfers to the air in the room instead of the water. Although you might consider that to be a waste of energy, the energy itself is still said to be conserved. Not created, and not destroyed.

As a matter of experience, you know that your tea water will not get hot without a transfer of energy. If you stare at the kettle and think deep thoughts, nothing happens to the kettle or the water. You cannot just say some magic words to summon the power of the universe to create energy out of nothing.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/limits-of-nature/tea-time.jpg' caption="Tea time"}

As a matter of experience, you know that your tea water will not get hot without a transfer of energy. If you stare at the kettle and think deep thoughts, nothing happens to the kettle or the water. You cannot just say some magic words to summon the power of the universe to create energy out of nothing.

Likewise, as your tea cools, energy is transferred to the air, either directly or through the sides of the tea cup. When you drink the tea, heat will transfer to your body, warming you up. In any case, the energy does not disappear, even though it is no longer in use by the tea.

Again, you might consider the energy that goes into the air to be wasted, and the way you heat the tea may result in more or less waste. Nature does not care about that. Energy is conserved. Not created, and not destroyed.

## A useful formula

In physics, the first law is expressed as a formula. This describes changes in energy of a system.

> ∆U = Q - W

The symbol ∆ is called delta, which means "a change in." U stands for the total energy of a system. So, ∆U is "the change in energy." On the other side, Q is the amount of heat added to the system, and W is the amount of work that comes out of the system.

Putting it all together, the change in energy of a system equals the heat added to the system minus the work done by the system.

What do we mean by a system? We are talking about something that has a clear boundary, where you can tell what is part of the system and what is not. A classic example of a system is a steam engine. It may be part of an old locomotive or a ship, or maybe it provides energy for a factory.

The boundaries of the engine are clear. Heat is added to the boiler to make steam. The steam expands with heat, putting pressure on a piston that does mechanical work of moving the wheels of the train or the paddle wheel of the ship.

## Recap

To recap the first law of thermodynamics, energy can only be transferred and converted, never created or destroyed.
