---
title: Second Law
description: Learn about the second law of thermodynamics.
published: true
---

# Second Law of Thermodynamics

Before we look at the second law of thermodynamics, we might need to add a word to your vocabulary. The word is entropy, which is a measure of disorder and randomness. Let's try a tasty example.

Consider an egg. Everything about the egg is organized. It's got kind of a smooth shell, and inside we will find a yolk and egg whites. Then what happens? The egg is cracked, the contents spill out, and we whip it into a soufflé. Someone eats and digests the egg, disbursing its nutrients throughout their body. Meanwhile, the shell was throw into the compost heap to decay into fertilizer for plants.

As time moves forward, the randomness or entropy of the egg increases. It becomes more mixed up, more spread out.

Now the 2nd law might make sense. Here it is.

The total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease over time.

The effect of this law is that natural processes are irreversible. You cannot un-break an egg. If a can of paint is spilled on the street, you cannot get all of the paint to return neatly to the can. You will always lose at least some energy to friction, or some other kind of loss. Nature is always moving things toward equilibrium, pushing for complete balance.

When two or more people get on an elevator, what do they tend to do? Most people spread out. Perhaps that is due to learned politeness, or a common personal preference. What if someone happens to let out some stinky gas in that elevator? That too will spread out until it reaches every corner and every nose.

This tendency toward equilibrium is not just a quirk of personality. It's the way nature works.

Another consequence of this law is the fact that there is no such thing as a perpetual motion machine. A machine cannot run forever without adding more energy because entropy will reduce the energy of the moving parts through friction (from parts rubbing or wind resistance), or noise.

What this means for power plants is that every conversion and transfer of energy comes with loses that cannot be prevented. We can only attempt to minimize the loses, and then accept that things will never be perfect.

Returning to our coal power plant, when coal is burned, not all of the released energy goes into making steam. As the steam moves to the turbine, some energy is lost through the pipes. When the turbine spins, friction steals some energy. As steam is condensed into water, heat is transferred into the cooling system that transfers heat to the atmosphere or a nearby body of water. Condensed water that comes out of the steam turbine has to be returned to the boiler. Water pumps are used, which consume some of the generated electricity. Entropy is at play throughout every step.

As a practical matter, we can understand where energy loss happens and try to reduce—but never eliminate—the losses. Insulation on the pipes can reduce heat loss from the steam. Lubrication can reduce loses due to friction on rotating shafts. A clever arrangement of the components might allow gravity to help.

No matter what we do, entropy is going to happen. In fact, the more we work to reverse it in one area, the more entropy is created in other ways. That does not mean we should do nothing. Entropy is not good or evil; it's just part of our universe. Best to be at peace with it, but also distrust any claim that a system can run by itself forever, or worse, that it can "create energy for free." (See the first law.)
