---
title: Water Under Pressure
description: The stuff of thermometers.
published: true
---

You know that water changes form at special temperatures. It freezes into ice when it is cold, flows as liquid at room temperature, and evaporates into water vapor at high temperatures. You may not realize that water behaves differently depending on how much pressure it is under.

# Water Under Pressure

## Atmospheric Pressure

Do you know that your experience with water depends on your elevation on the earth's surface? We are surrounded by air. One hopes the air is a healthy mix of oxygen, nitrogen and other gases. Those gases have mass that is pulled down by the earth's gravity. So all of the air above you is pushing down. This is called atmospheric pressure or air pressure.

At sea level, things are under one atmosphere of pressure. The full weight on earth's atmosphere is pushing down. At higher elevations, there is less atmosphere above to push down. The pressure on an airplane that is flying above 10,000 ft (about 2 miles high) is so low that the air inside the plane has to be pressurized. Otherwise, people would be quite uncomfortable, to say the least.

How does pressure affect water? What does "pressurized water" mean, and how is that useful? Let's tackle these questions and learn some things you never knew about water.

## Boiling Water Under Pressure

What if you are at an ocean beach in the evening, and you warm up with some instant hot cocoa? You could boil some water over a portable stove. At sea level, under one atmosphere of pressure, the water boils when it reaches 100 degrees Celsius (100˚C), or 212 degrees Fahrenheit (212˚F) if you are American, or 373 degrees Kelvin (373˚K) if you are a science nerd. So many ways to measure temperature. Let's stick with Celsius to keep it simple. Water freezes at 0˚C and boils at 100˚C.

Speaking of ways to measure, we have a variety of units for measuring pressure. 1 atmosphere is the same as 101,300 pascals (pa), which is equivalent to 14.7 pounds per square inch (psi). For our purposes, we will use atmospheres, since that's easy to relate to, and mega-pascals (Mpa, or million pascals) when we talk about industrial-scale pressures, like in a power plant.

Alright, now that we have our units straight, where were we? Enjoying some hot cocoa. What if you travel to Denver in the winter. After some skiing, you might want to make yourself some hot cocoa. Denver is about a mile above sea level, and the air pressure is only 0.83 atmospheres. Water at lower pressure boils at a lower temperature. In this case, it only needs to get to 94.4˚C.

The difference in temperature means that boiling water in Denver has less heat than boiling water at the ocean. Then again, 94˚C is still hot enough to burn your tongue.

What if we go the other direction and add more pressure to water. Divers know about water pressure from swimming under water. However, it's tough to keep your stove lit under water, so let's think of a different approach. We can use a water pump to put pressure on the water. We could also use a special device called...wait for it...a pressurizer. Yes, that's a clever name. Basically, if you put the water in a closed container, even a long one like a pipe, and push on it, the pressure will rise.

If you think about it, you already know that increasing the pressure (from 0.83 to 1 atmosphere) makes water boil at a higher temperature. Sure enough, under 2 atmospheres of pressure, water be heated to 120.84˚C to boil. Under 3 atmospheres, water boils at 134.14˚C. Neat.

By the way, the temperature where water boils for a given pressure is called the boiling point. As water changes from liquid to water vapor, it is said to be saturated, which means that it is a mixture of water and water vapor.

In fact, if you plot the boiling point of water as the pressure and temperature increase, you get a smooth curve called the boiling point curve. It is also known as the saturation curve. Why have one name when you can have two?

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/limits-of-nature/saturation-curve.svg' caption="Saturation curve" width='400'}

Now might be a good time to take a look at this fancy graph. There's a lot going on in the picture that is all about water under pressure. For starters, check out the yellow curve that starts at the lower left corner and rises to the right through three black dots. That is the boiling point curve. Water to the right of that curve is a gas (a.k.a. water vapor). Water to the left of the curve is either solid (a.k.a. "ice") or liquid (a.k.a. "water").

The triple point is where water is at just the right temperature and pressure to in all three forms at once. At pressures below the triple point, water cannot be in liquid form. That seems strange, but notice how low that pressure is, a mere fraction of an atmosphere. So we might be talking about water that is floating in space. When at astronaut spits out the window of the international space station, it freezes instantly into a spiticle – an icicle made of spit. As sunlight warms one side of the spiticle, atoms of water fly off as water vapor.

As much fun as this example has become, let's focus on areas above the triple point.

The next dot shows the boiling point of water at sea level, where we made our first cup of hot cocoa.

The third dot looks pretty important. It's even got a name that yells with urgency, "the critical point." For our purposes, let's just say that water gets crazy if you add pressure or heat beyond the critical point.

## Pressurized Water in Action

All of that is kind of interesting, but why should you care?

By applying enough pressure, water can get very hot while staying liquid. This hot water, at temperatures above 100˚C, can be used to heat other things. The hotter we get it, the more heat will be transferred.

This is what happens in a pressurized water reactor. A typical pressurized water reactor vessel operates at 15.5 Mpa of pressure, which is 150 atmospheres. That's 150 times the pressure of the atmosphere at sea level. The water is heated to 315˚C, below the boiling point of 374˚C. In other words, the water gets really hot and stays in liquid form, which is great for flowing through a giant pipe in a big loop.

This primary hot loop flows past a secondary loop filled with water under less pressure. Water in the second loop turns to steam that drives a steam turbine, which does work on an electrical generator. The generator spins, making electricity that gets pushed onto the grid that powers the lights you left on in your room.

As it fulfills its purpose, the hot water in the primary loop cools to about 275˚C before returning to the reactor core for reheating. So water in this loop cycles between 275˚C and 315˚C, which can only happen when the water is under enormous pressure.

Why bother with two loops? That keeps the water that is exposed to the radioactive core separate from the water that drives the steam turbine. As long as there are no leaks, the contaminated water is isolated from the outside world.

Here's a picture that should help understand how sensible this arrangement is.

:PictureFrame{src='lessons/limits-of-nature/pwr-animated.gif' caption="Pressurized Water Reactor schematic" width='800'}
